--- 
wordpress_id: 71
layout: post
title: vCalendar files from Pick&#8217;Em
wordpress_url: http://blog.sideline.ca/2004/10/22/vcalendar-files-from-pickem/

<p>I'm thinking lately of lots of updates to Pick'Em in addition to the changes suggested by the community (confidence points, tiebreakers), Anthony (e-mail reminders, gridview of picks) and Dan (editable datagrid for updating scores, xmlteam.com integration).<font size="2"></font></p><ul><li>Centralization of many of the duplicated routines like FormatDate, FormatScore, FormatTime, etc. I'll probably create a central class in the Components folder that takes care of all those items. I think the .ToLocalTime and .ToUniversalTime would get added in there as well since the translation in the future may be based on a module setting rather than the server's setting.</li><li>I read a post online that was asking why the methods in the Controller classes in DNN weren't shared. This totally makes sense to me (I hate having all of those instantiation statements all over the place), so I'll probably go through the BLL and change all the methods to shared.</li><li>DNN 3.0 might mean some changes so I'll have to go through and double check everything.</li><li>Changing the XML schedule format to be SportML compliant (why have my own schema when a standard already exists')</li></ul><p>I've also been reading up on vCalendar files that can be imported into Outlook calendar.  If I've already got a schedule import system working, why not also allow that schedule to be exported into Outlook'  Makes sense to me.  It also gives me one other item that differentiates me from the competition.</p><p>I'm not sure if vCalendar is a proprietary format (I've seen some posts on something called iCalendar but I haven't read up on it), but it would be nice to support alternate Calendar applications with one standard file.  Maybe that's too much to ask'</p><p>Anyways, here's some good links on vCalendar that I've found:</p><ul><li><a href="http://www.codeproject.com/useritems/vcalendarfiletodownload.asp">Generating vCalendar files (.vcs) to download in ASP.NET</a></li><li><a href="http://www.codeproject.com/vb/net/vcalendar.asp'print=true">.NET class to create and maintain vCalendar information</a></li></ul>
