--- 
wordpress_id: 189
layout: post
title: "Mike&#8217;s Dump : Duct Tape"
disqus_url: http://blog.sideline.ca/2005/10/25/mikes-dump-duct-tape/

Mike's got some pretty good stories but this one has to take the cake: 
<blockquote>
<p><em>The other doctor patient exchange I found a little more amusing went something like this:<br /><br />(All behind a drawn curtain ' thank God)<br /><br />Doctor: What brings you in today'<br />Patient: My ankles.<br />Doctor: What happened'<br />Patient: Well, you see, my socks wouldn't stay up so I used some duct tape and taped them to my skin and socks so they would stay up.<br />(My first mistake was I looked at Sandy and we were both thinking the same thing' taped on socks)<br />Patient: I took the tape off and the skin was all raw and I wanted to have it form a scab so I put some talcum powder on it.<br />Doctor: How long was the duct tape on'<br />Patient: About a week.<br />(Now that paints a couple pictures. Either feet in socks that haven't been washed in a week or he is showering with the duct taped on socks)<br />Doctor: One week continuously'<br />Patient: (long pause) well.<br />Doctor: More than a few days'<br />Patient: Yes<br />Patient: So after a while I noticed this really, really bad smell and that is when I decided to come in.<br />Doctor: Yes' It looks like there is some puss under the skin.<br />Patient: No, it is more like this bloody watery fluid. I know because I cut into it. Actually that is when I noticed the extremely bad smell. It smells like rotten flesh.<br />(I had to leave the room at this point because I wasn't going to be able to contain my laugher because he kept going on and on about the smell. When I came back in I noticed the room didn't smell hospital fresh.)<br />Doctor: Ok, we'll freeze it up and get this cleaned up<br />Patient: Can't you just take a scalpel to it' It's ok because I feel absolutely nothing down there.<br />Doctor: Ummm' no we'll freeze it first.<br /><br />Yeah sure, I'm probably being insensitive because it sounds like the situation is pretty serious but holy cow, the guy duct taped on his socks and left them there for a week (at least that is what he admitted too). Duct tape!</em></p></blockquote>
<p>via <a href="http://www.prvsoftware.ca:8081/cs/blogs/mikes_dump/archive/2005/10/24/199.aspx">Mike's Dump : Duct Tape</a></p>
