--- 
wordpress_id: 114
layout: post
title: Paper on Effective Implementation of a Fantasy Sports Website
wordpress_url: http://blog.sideline.ca/2005/03/16/paper-on-effective-implementation-of-a-fantasy-sports-website/

<p>I'm interested in starting up my own online fantasy sports website and have been building code since I was in high school to manage different sports pools.  As I move closer to actually starting a company, it's good to see that some folks have done actual research on the topic!</p>
<p>From <a href="http://sourceforge.net/forum/forum.php'forum_id=339502">http://sourceforge.net/forum/forum.php'forum_id=339502</a></p>
<p><strong>''''''''''''-</strong></p>
<p><strong>Posted By:</strong> garym<br /><b>Date:</b> 2003-12-22 11:16<br /><b>Summary:</b> <a href="http://sourceforge.net/forum/forum.php'forum_id=339502">Effective Implementation of a Fantasy Sports Website</a> </p>
<p>[ A new paper by Peter Cossette and Andrew Horning has some amazingly <br />nice things to say about Sportwire! I hope they don't mind the <br />reprint, but there was no contact info in the copy I received. I hope <br />they forgive the formatting too, as it's just a dump of the Word DOC <br />via antiword --- Also do note that while they say Sportwire can be <br />used for HTTP and FTP sports data acquisition, it is primarily <br />intended for the traditional TELNET feeds from vendors such as <br />SportsNetwork and ESPN -- garym ] <br /> <br />Effective Implementation of Real-Time Data on a Fantasy Sports Website <br /> <br />By Peter Cossette and Andrew Horning <br />CS 459 <br /> <br />December 16, 2003 <br /> <br />Abstract: <br /> <br />Online fantasy sports are a growing industry-sales are expected to be <br />at $50 million in 2003-and many companies would like to get in on the <br />"gold rush". A good way for a start-up Fantasy Sports website to <br />differentiate itself would be to offer real-time data to its <br />customers. Research was done to explore the different options <br />available for implementing real-time data. <br /> <br />This included Internet research and correspondence with vendors who <br />offer real-time sports data. It was discovered that many factors must <br />be considered when a creating a Fantasy Sports "start-up": cost, data <br />format, and method of data retrieval. The costs of acquiring the data <br />are small compared to other costs that are incurred when running an <br />Internet business. After analyzing the available data formats and <br />methods of data retrieval, it was concluded that a Fantasy Sports <br />start-up would be best served by obtaining its real-time sports data <br />as SportsML. This should be done over the Internet using HTTP or an <br />XML Web Service. <br /> <br /> <br />NOTE: Some of the information in this paper is proprietary and <br />confidential and is only intended for educational use. <br /> <br />It's not hard to understand why people are becoming "obsessed" with <br />online fantasy sports-they fit in nicely with both are our collective <br />Internet addiction and "need-to-know-NOW" culture. As players of <br />fantasy sports, the authors of this paper admit that they get a rush <br />from watching the statistics of their Fantasy Football team update in <br />"real-time," almost as soon as Randy Moss scores a touchdown (or <br />Daunte Culpepper fumbles). That "rush" became the motivation for this <br />research-a desire to find out how "they" (the Fantasy Sports websites) <br />implement real-time data, and more importantly, how "anyone" could go <br />about implementing real-time data on a Fantasy Sports website. <br /> <br />Fantasy sports are on their way to becoming an obsession in the United <br />States, as more and more people are getting involved everyday. One <br />participates in fantasy sports by joining a "fantasy sports league" - <br />typically a group of 8 to 12 friends, co-workers, or strangers that <br />meet in person or online and compete against one another for fun (and <br />sometimes money). The people in a Fantasy Sports League compete by <br />choosing real players from one of the professional sports leagues <br />(ie. NFL, MLB, NBA) to be on their "fantasy team"-the better the real <br />players do, the better the fantasy team does [1]. Usually, each <br />"real" professional athlete is allowed to be on only one fantasy team <br />in a Fantasy Football (or Baseball, Basketball, etc.) League-to keep <br />things fair, the players are divvied up in a "draft", where the <br />"owners" of the teams in the league take turns, in round-robin order, <br />selecting players to be on their team. Fantasy football is the "king" <br />of fantasy sports-78% of fantasy sports players play fantasy football <br />[2]. <br /> <br />In 2000, there were approximately 8 million Americans involved in <br />fantasy sports [1]. According to the Fantasy Sports Trade <br />Association, that number has risen to 15 million in 2003-the rapid <br />growth can mostly be contributed to the Internet [2]. An online <br />league (basically, a league with a webpage) is attractive to the <br />players in a fantasy sports league for two reasons. First of all, the <br />league's webpage keeps track of scoring and standings <br />automatically-eliminating the need for someone to spend hours manually <br />compiling the league's "statistics" by hand (even five years ago, many <br />leagues had a "commissioner" who was assigned this unenviable task) <br />[1]. Even more attractive is a webpage that supplies real-time data, <br />which allows the performance of your fantasy team to be updated while <br />the "real" players perform on the field, on the court, on the rink, <br />etc. Real-time data will get fantasy players to return to their <br />leagues web site over-and-over in the same day [3]. <br /> <br />Rapid growth in fantasy sports participation is creating a respectable <br />on-line fantasy sports industry. Spending on on-line leagues is <br />expected to reach $50 million in 2003. The biggest player in the <br />online market is Sportsline.com-which had on-line sales of $11 million <br />in 2002, $8.8 million of which came from football leagues. Sportsline <br />expects its football sales to grow by 50 percent in 2003. Another <br />major player, Sportingnews.com, had sales of $5 million in 2002. <br />Fantasy sports websites have a very attractive customer base-according <br />to the Fantasy Sports Trade Association, the average fantasy sports <br />player makes $76,000 per year and spends an average of $120 per year <br />on website fees and "under-the-table" betting. The combination of <br />website fees and betting makes fantasy sports a billion dollar <br />industry [3]. <br /> <br />The prospects of starting a fantasy sports website and competing in <br />this growing market appear good. Bullysports.com went online in <br />2000-they already have 40,000 paying customers in 2003 [4]. To <br />legitimize itself, a Fantasy Sports start-up should offer real-time <br />updates (as not all fantasy sports websites do). Real-time data can <br />be obtained from vendors in a numbers of different ways. The vendors <br />use protocols such as FTP, HTTP, Telnet, and XML Web Services to <br />deliver real-time data to their customers via the Internet, dedicated <br />circuits, leased lines, or satellite. And the price of real-time data <br />is very reasonable. One vendor offers real-time data for any one <br />league (such as the NBA) for around $800 per month-real- time data for <br />all the major US sports (both professional and collegiate) costs about <br />$2500 per month [5]. So the cost really isn't prohibitive-a Fantasy <br />Sports startup would spend much more money on programming labor, <br />server hardware, and ISP fees. <br /> <br />The vendors supply the data in many different formats. Some vendors <br />simply provide ASCII comma- or tab- delimited text files [6]. Others <br />more conveniently format the data in XML (Extensible Markup Language). <br />This XML can be proprietary XML, in an XML format designed by the <br />vendor, or SportsML (Sports Markup Language), a sports-specific type <br />of XML. SportsML is open-source, adheres to W3C standards for XML, <br />and is backed by the International Press Telecommunications Council <br />(IPTC). Using sport-specific DTD's (Document Type Definition), <br />SportsML can be configured to support a specific sport, such as <br />football, basketball, or hockey [7]. As the Sportsml.com website puts <br />it, "SportsML aims to be the global XML standard for the interchange <br />of sports data". <br /> <br />One vendor firmly in support of SportsML is XML Team Solutions. They <br />only offer their real-time sports data in SportsML format. This data <br />can obtained from XML Team Solutions in two ways-via a "delivered <br />feed" or an XML Web Service. These two options use different <br />architectures and protocols. In the "delivered feed" approach, <br />customers run a program on their server that uses HTTP to check XML <br />Team Solutions' server for new SportsML documents about once a minute. <br />When new SportsML files are found, they can be retrieved using HTTP's <br />standard authentication procedures and dropped into a specified <br />directory on the customer's database server. To process their <br />"delivered feed", XML Team Solutions recommends using a server with at <br />least 256 MB of RAM, a 20 GB hard drive, and a Pentium processor 1.2 <br />GHz or higher [8]. <br /> <br />XML Team Solutions' other delivery option is through an XML Web <br />Service. According to an article by Mark Augstyniak, an XML Web <br />Service is <br /> <br />any programming component or object that makes information <br />available via standard Internet protocols such as HTTP [and <br />SOAP].using the HTTP protocol, requests are sent from client <br />applications, in an XML standard format, to XML Web Services for <br />processing.[After] the request is processed, an XML document is <br />generated. and sent back to the client application [9]. <br /> <br />XML Team Solutions offers its customers a Web Service that uses a <br />SportsML API (written in Perl) to query the XML Team Solutions' <br />database for the desired information. When the results of these <br />queries return to the client's web server as SportsML, the SportsML <br />can be processed into HTML or the like and sent off to the web <br />browsers of the Fantasy Sports website's customers for display. Note <br />that this option uses a different architecture than the "delivered <br />feed". The SportsML files are only archived on XML Team Solutions' <br />database server-the customer is using the XML Web Service to avoid <br />having to "retrieve, process, and database thousands of files a day" <br />[10]. <br /> <br />Another vendor, The Sports Network, is probably the world's largest <br />supplier of real-time sports data. Their customers include CBS <br />Sportsline.com, the New York Times, and Reuters [11]. The Sports <br />Network distributes data via the Internet or satellite [12]. The <br />Internet service is provided through a Telnet connection-this <br />connection can managed by components such as Oro Inc.'s TelnetClient <br />Java class [13]. The Sports Network keeps their data in unstructured <br />ASCII tables [14]. They then convert the data into proprietary XML or <br />some other format requested by a customer. For instance, The Sports <br />Network supplies sports data to Reuters in Reuters' "long-standing <br />internal data format" (whatever that consists of) [11]. <br /> <br />ESPN Sportsticker is another large vendor in the sports data world. <br />Their clients include Yahoo!, Fox Sports Net, and CNN [15]. <br />Sportsticker offers real-time data in two formats-proprietary XML and <br />ASCII text files. The proprietary XML is streamed via the Internet <br />and delivered using FTP or a TCP socket connection. Every sport <br />covered by Sportsticker has its own unique set of DTD's-these are <br />given to the customers to help in the processing of the XML files <br />[13]. <br /> <br />If an ESPN Sportsticker client desires (or needs) ASCII data instead <br />of XML, they can get the data by satellite or "dedicated circuit". <br />The dedicated circuit option is offered at 1200 and 9600 Baud, or what <br />Sportsticker calls "Broadcast Sports Wire" (BSW) and "High Speed Wire" <br />(HSW). Both BSW and HSW are one-way, asynchronous broadcast feeds <br />transmitted continuously from the Sportsticker server to customer <br />servers over dedicated transmission circuits. Each message sent is <br />encrypted and sent as a packet. If data from the packet is lost <br />during transmission the packet is discarded-in other words, only full <br />packets are processed on the client side [16]. The client receives <br />the data through a modem connected through the serial port-custom <br />software reads the feed and channels it to a TCP/IP or UNIX socket <br />[13]. The language used by Sportsticker in the specifications for BSW <br />and HSW ("asynchronous", "one-way", "dedicated circuit", "no error <br />recovery" ) suggests that these services are possibly implemented <br />using ATM and/or Frame Relay. <br /> <br />Another commercial supplier of real-time sports data is STATS Inc. <br />STATS Inc. offers data as ASCII text files in comma delimited, tab <br />delimited, or fixed field length formats-they can also create "custom <br />formatted files". The files can obtained from STATS Inc. in a number <br />of ways. They can be retrieved by FTP or dial-up download, or they <br />can be delivered to you by FTP or even email (but imagine how <br />cumbersome it would be to implement real-time data using email <br />delivery!) [6]. <br /> <br />With so many options available, how should a Fantasy Sports website go <br />about implementing real-time data' First, a data format must be <br />chosen. XML is a more desirable choice than ASCII text files-XML <br />parsers like those available in Java for SAX and DOM make XML a lot <br />easier to work with then delimited text files. But what type of XML <br />is better-SportsML, or a vendor's proprietary XML' SportsML appears <br />more advantageous. First of all, the future of SportsML looks bright. <br />XML Team Solutions, the industry's biggest advocate for SportsML, and <br />The Sports Network, the industry's biggest distributor of sports data, <br />have announced an agreement to distribute TSN's content through XML <br />Team Solutions [11]. This should allow SportsML to <br />proliferate. Secondly, the spread of SportsML would be good for the <br />sports data industry. SportsML is an open, non-proprietary, global <br />standard. If more publishers and customers of real-time sports data <br />would implement SportsML, a Fantasy Sports website would be more <br />adaptable, since switching from one vendor to another or integrating <br />data from multiple sources would be much easier. <br /> <br />A Fantasy Sports start-up must also consider how it will obtain <br />real-time data from a vendor. Many options are available: HTTP, FTP, <br />an XML Web Service, a dedicated circuit, satellite, even email. Of <br />course, email delivery would be very inconvenient. A dedicated <br />circuit or satellite transmission would likely be too expensive for a <br />start-up that wants to make a profit as soon as possible. If cost and <br />ease-of-use are the primary considerations, an XML Web Service such as <br />the one offered by XML Team Solutions would probably be the best <br />option. An XML Web Service can eliminate the cost of developing a <br />client-server architecture for retrieving, processing, and storing XML <br />documents-these costs can run as high as $40,000 [17]. <br /> <br />But if retrieving and storing the SportsML documents is a must, using <br />HTTP or FTP to get data from a vendor is an acceptable option. Is <br />HTTP a better option than FTP, or vice versa' Both protocols run over <br />TCP, so both benefit from TCP's reliable data transfer [18]. In <br />theory, an HTTP connection can be made faster than an FTP connection. <br />HTTP requires one TCP connection, while FTP requires two: a control <br />connection, followed by a data connection [18]. FTP also creates more <br />overhead for the vendor's server-an FTP server must maintain the <br />control connection of each client as long as that client stays <br />connected, even though this connection is "often under-utilized and <br />may spend most of its time idle" [19]. This limits the number of <br />simultaneous connections an FTP server can maintain [18]. While HTTP <br />is better at transferring small files than FTP, FTP is more efficient <br />at transferring large files and multiple files at a time [19]. <br />All-in-all, if a vendor wants to use HTTP (because it is easier to <br />implement, saves money, etc.), a Fantasy Sports start-up should be <br />comfortable doing so. <br /> <br />Besides, the existence of the Sportwire software package makes HTTP <br />(or FTP) retrieval and storage of XML documents financially <br />feasible. Sportwire is a Sourceforge.net project that functions as "an <br />archiving and presentation system" for the real-time data that is <br />distributed by vendors in XML form. Best of all (to a Fantasy Sports <br />start-up), it is available for free, through GNU Public License. <br />Sportwire is comprised of a two-tier architecture: the "Feeder" and <br />the "SportPage". The "Feeder" reads incoming XML documents, <br />transforms them (if necessary) into SportsML, and maps the elements of <br />these documents into a relational database. The "SportPage" queries <br />the database for data and presents this data to web pages [13]. <br /> <br />Its rich features (and its price) make using the Sportwire system to <br />implement a Fantasy sports website very attractive. <br /> <br />As online fantasy sports rise in popularity, many companies will try <br />to get in on the "craze" by starting a Fantasy Sports website. To <br />differentiate itself from the rest of the pack, a Fantasy Sports <br />start-up should offer real-time updates to its customers. The costs <br />of obtaining real-time data are low, compared to the other costs of <br />running an Internet business. However, other factors must be taken <br />into consideration. The data is available in many formats: text <br />files, proprietary XML, and SportsML. It can be obtained over the <br />Internet, using HTTP, FTP, or an XML Web Service. Or it can be <br />obtained over a dedicated circuit, in a one-way broadcast feed from <br />vendor to client. For a Fantasy Sports start-up, using SportsML <br />(obtained through HTTP or an XML Web Service) is the best <br />option. SportsML's open, non-proprietary nature makes it the most <br />flexible solution-both HTTP and XML Web Services offer low cost and <br />ease-of-use, for both vendor and client. <br /> <br />References <br /> <br />[1] Brown, Scott. "Technology Removes Drudgery From Fantasy Game." <br />Florida Today Online. 17 May 2000. 2 Dec 2003 <br />&amp;lt;<a href="http://www.floridatoday.com/news/tech/stories/2000a/may/tt051700f.htm">http://www.floridatoday.com/news/tech/stories/2000a/may/tt051700f.htm</a>&amp;gt;. <br /> <br />[2] "Fantasy Sports Participation on the Rise, Association Says." <br />St. Louis Business Journal Online. 14 Aug 2003. 2 Dec 2003 <br />&amp;lt;<a href="http://stlouis.bizjournals.com/stlouis/stories/2003/08/11/daily62.html">http://stlouis.bizjournals.com/stlouis/stories/2003/08/11/daily62.html</a>&amp;gt;. <br /> <br />[3] Hu, Jim. "Sites See Big Season For Fantasy Sports." CNET News <br />Online. 8 Aug 2003. 2 Dec 2003  <br />&amp;lt;<a href="http://news.com.com/2100-1026-5061351.html">http://news.com.com/2100-1026-5061351.html</a>&amp;gt;. <br /> <br />[4] Loving, Dan. "Pick Your Football Fantasy." Kansas.com. 2 Sept <br />2003. 2 Dec 2003 <br />&amp;lt;<a href="http://www.kansas.com/mld/kansas/sports/6670028.htm">http://www.kansas.com/mld/kansas/sports/6670028.htm</a>&amp;gt;. <br /> <br />[5] Confidential source. E-mail to the author. 4 Dec 2003. <br /> <br />[6] STATS, Inc. "Fantasy Operator Order Form for the 2003 Football <br />Season." E-mail to the author. 25 Nov 2003. <br /> <br />[7] "SportsML Tutorial." SportsML Home Page. 2 Dec 2003 <br />&amp;lt;<a href="http://www.sportsml.com/tutorial.php">http://www.sportsml.com/tutorial.php</a>&amp;gt;. <br /> <br />[8] "Delivered Feed." XML Team Solutions Home Page. 2 Dec 2003 <br />&amp;lt;<a href="http://www.xmlteam.com/documentation/delivered-feed.php">http://www.xmlteam.com/documentation/delivered-feed.php</a>&amp;gt;. <br /> <br />[9] Augustyniak, Mark. "What Are XML Web Services and How Do They Fit <br />into the .NET Framework'" InformIT Online. 6 Sep 2002. 18 Nov 2003 <br />&amp;lt;<a href="http://www.informit.com/">http://www.informit.com</a>&amp;gt;. <br /> <br />[10] "Web Service." XML Team Solutions Home Page. 2 Dec 2003 <br />&amp;lt;<a href="http://www.xmlteam.com/documentation/web-service.php">http://www.xmlteam.com/documentation/web-service.php</a>&amp;gt;. <br /> <br />[11] "The Sports Network and XML Team Ally to Revolutionize Sports <br />Content Delivery." The Sports Network Home Page 2 Dec 2003. 7 Dec 2003 <br />&amp;lt;<a href="http://www.sportsnetwork.com/default.asp'c=sportsnetwork&amp;amp;page=pr/news/release_2003_12_02.htm">http://www.sportsnetwork.com/default.asp'c=sportsnetwork&amp;amp;page=pr/news/release_2003_12_02.htm</a>&amp;gt;. <br /> <br />[12] "About The Sports Network." The Sports Network Home Page. 7 Dec <br />2003 <br />&amp;lt;<a href="http://www.sportsnetwork.com/default.asp'c=sportsnetwork&amp;amp;page=other/misc/about.htm">http://www.sportsnetwork.com/default.asp'c=sportsnetwork&amp;amp;page=other/misc/about.htm</a>&amp;gt;. <br /> <br />[13] "Sportwire II: Architecture." Sportwire Home Page. 18 Nov 2003 <br />&amp;lt;<a href="http://sportwire.sourceforge.net/architecture/">http://sportwire.sourceforge.net/architecture/</a>&amp;gt;. <br /> <br />[14] "Data Conversion into XML." X-Fetch Home Page. 2 Dec 2003 <br />&amp;lt;<a href="http://www.x-fetch.com/Component_WhitePapers_PDF/X-Fetch_Wrapper22_WP.pdf">http://www.x-fetch.com/Component_WhitePapers_PDF/X-Fetch_Wrapper22_WP.pdf</a>&amp;gt;. <br /> <br />[15] "Company Overview." ESPN Sportsticker Home Page. 2 Dec 2003 <br />&amp;lt;<a href="http://www.sportsticker.com/ticker/overview.html">http://www.sportsticker.com/ticker/overview.html</a>&amp;gt;. <br /> <br />[16] "ESPN Sportsticker Wire Specifications." ESPN Sportsticker Home <br />Page 5 Nov 2003, 18 Nov 2003.  <br />&amp;lt;<a href="http://www.sportsticker.com/ticker/specs/wire.pdf">http://www.sportsticker.com/ticker/specs/wire.pdf</a>&amp;gt;. <br /> <br />[17] "XMLTeam Chooses Sportwire". Sportwire Home Page 9 July 2003. 7 <br />Dec 2003 <br />&amp;lt;<a href="http://sourceforge.net/forum/forum.php'forum_id=291954">http://sourceforge.net/forum/forum.php'forum_id=291954</a>&amp;gt;. <br /> <br />[18] Kurose, James F. and Keith W. Ross. Computer Networking: A <br />Top-Down Approach Featuring the Internet. 2nd ed. Boston: <br />Addison-Wesley, 2003. pp. 104-105. <br /> <br />[19] Litjens, Remco, Matt Siler, and Mark D Spiller. "FTP Versus <br />HTTP: A Comparison of Two Mainstream Transfer Protocols." Paper <br />posted online. 13 Dec 2003 <br />&amp;lt;<a href="http://www-cad.eecs.berkeley.edu/~mds/research/1995/http.html">http://www-cad.eecs.berkeley.edu/~mds/research/1995/http.html</a>&amp;gt;. <br /></p>
